<style>
#navigation {
display: none;
}

table {
width: auto;
}

</style>

# Apple 16 -- unofficial website -- comparison

<ul class="menu">
<li><a href="/apple">About</a></li>
<li><a href="/apple/boat.html">My Boat</a></li>
<li class="cur"><a href="/apple/comparison.html">Comparison</a></li>
<li><a href="/apple/building.html">Building</a></li>
<li><a href="/apple/others.html">Other Builds</a></li>
</ul>

## Comparison with other boats

There are many plywood boats suitable for home builders in the ~15-16ft range,
roughly 5ft beam, a couple hundred pounds, good performance as sailboats, decent
as rowboats. It's a particularly compelling size, as pretty much any plywood
sailboat boat that can fit more than one person will be longer than 8 feet, and
once you are scarfing a sheet of plywood (and have gone above what could go on
the roof of a car or bed of a pickup), you might as well push to the edge of
what two sheets of plywood gets you. The similar light weight of all these boats
reflects their overall cost and complexity: a 200lb boat and a 500lb boat, even
if they are the same length, are going to be very different in terms of
difficulty of building and cost, as at this weight almost no boats have built in
ballast and thus all of the weight are actual structural elements. That means if
you want to compare _similar_ boats, length and beam will give you an idea of
carrying capacity (to first approximation), and weight will give you an idea of
cost/complexity (to first approximation). 

All of the boats on this page are in a roughly similar design space as the Apple
16: 15ft-16ft long, about 5ft wide (beam), and somewhere between 130lbs to
250lbs (actual weights will vary wildly, as choice of materials makes a huge
difference; I found this out when I built a supposedly 65lb boat that weighs
120lbs by replacing the 4mm ply with 6mm and using 29lb per sheet lumberyard ply
instead of 12lb 4mm occume and 18lb 6mm occume).

A few are particularly popular, and this page compares the Apple 16 with them,
highlighting advantages, in particular, why I ended up building it!

### **Goat Island Skiff** *by Michael Storer*

Storer's most popular boat, the GIS is 15'6", 5' beam, 125+lbs, with a 105ft lug
sail, though [Clint Chase](http://www.chase-small-craft.com/) has a lug-yawl
option for it. 

In a lot of ways, this boat seems incredibly similar, though it is certainly
easier to build (the hull is a flat bottom panel, two sides, and a transom), and
it's very highly recommended. Also, Storer's plans are generally very good, and
the GIS is probably the best of them, given that the plans have had the most
eyes on them! The downside is that it seems to be a boat designed for dinghy
sailors, in that it is a bit unstable! The light weight, combined with the
narrow front means that capsizing it is certainly a risk, and there doesn't seem
to be much to do about it aside from be an experienced sailor!

While obviously any light dinghy will capsize, since the Apple 16 doesn't have a
flat bottom, it can have ballast put in (water tanks, or more easily, heavy
material like metal or sand), which will make it much more stable. This might
make it less exciting to sail, but much better when out with family, or in
heavier weather -- and with removable ballast, it's easy to switch. Ballasting
isn't really possible in a flat bottom boat like the GIS, because it would need
to switch from side to side on each tack (obviously, the _sailors_ serve as
ballast, but that requires skill). Aside from the easier build and more
straightforward plans (there is essentially _one_ GIS -- modifications do exist,
but are pretty rare and minor), another advantage the GIS has is the flat
transom makes mounting a motor more straightforward -- no complicated mount
needed to account for the 30 degree raked transom on the Apple 16.

### **Phoenix III** *by Ross Lillistone*

A narrower boat at 4'9", and a little shorter at 15'1.5", and in general, it is
quite a bit smaller, given the area ahead of the mast is inaccessible and the
side decks, while making it more seaworthy, also cut into space. At least one
sailor experienced with it (and indeed, who thinks it is great) said that it is
really comfortably a two person boat. On the flip side, it is probably a much
better row boat! It is reported to be quite stable, but is still quite light
(spec'ed at 132lbs), and with 104sqft (for the sloop), it moves along!

Building wise, it is more complex, given the glued lapstrake, but that's easily
avoided by building the similarly designed stitch and glue First Mate.

In terms of comparison with the Apple, I think the main difference is that for a
similar (though, 8.5" isn't nothing!) length, and probably similar building
process, the Apple 16 is a lot more boat: whether that is actually relevant is
of course, a personal decision, but being able to take out three other people
comfortably was important to me, and all the other constraints (total cost,
space it would take up in garage, difficulty to transport it) seemed pretty
similar to me. But, I say that as someone who considers rowing a necessary was
to get around when there isn't enough wind!


### **Argie 15** *by Dudley Dix*

This is perhaps the closest boat to the Apple 16 -- partly because the design
brief was very similar. While with the Apple 16, Tom was trying to figure out
the biggest boat that could be built in a single car garage, he ended up
determining that it should come out of 6 sheets of plywood. With the Argie 15,
Dudley wanted to build the biggest boat possible out of 6 sheets of plywood. The
Argie 15 is a little shorter (15'5") and a little wider (6'0"). The pluses are
that it is designed as a 3-in-1, so fitting a motor is straightforward (indeed,
it can be used solely as a motor boat), and it's also designed to make it easy
to sleep on the floor (if that is important to you). And it is clearly a
well-tested design by a good designer. Finally, it can be gotten in kit form in
many places (in the US, the kits are cut by CLC, though sold by Dudley). So
there is a _lot_ going for it! What tips me over to the Apple 16 is partly the
rig: while people have put different rigs on the Argie 15, a stayed bermuda
sloop is what it is intended to be, and I prefer unstayed lug rigs and like the
idea (though have not sailed!) of lug yawls. The spars in the Apple 16 fit in
the hull without needing to be in multiple pieces. Finally, there are pure
aesthetics: the Argie 15 is certainly a pretty boat, but the plumb bow of the
Apple 16 grabbed me.

### **Calendar Islands Yawl** *by Clint Chase*

This is a much newer design that any of the other boats on this list (which are
all, as far as I know, from the mid-early 90s or before). At 15'6" and 5'2"
beam, 235lbs, it is very similar in specs to the Apple 16. Appearance wise, the
lapstrake upper strakes certainly give a different look, and the fact that it
can be built from a kit may be appealing to some (but, the cost was prohibitive
to me; it would have increased the total cost of the build by at least a factor
of two). The downside, of course, is that it is quite a new design, and while
Clint is certainly a designer who has put a ton of time into this boat, it
hasn't been tested in the way that others on this list have.

#### Have another boat you have compared with? Share it with [dbp@dbpmail.net](mailto:dbp@dbpmail.net)
